‘I beg your pardon,’ said Mr. Wolfshiem, ‘I had a wrong
man.’
A succulent hash arrived, and Mr. Wolfshiem, forget-
ting the more sentimental atmosphere of the old Metropole, began to eat with ferocious delicacy. His eyes, meanwhile, roved very slowly all around the room—he completed the arc by turning to inspect the people directly behind. I think that, except for my presence, he would have taken one short glance beneath our own table.
‘Look here, old sport,’ said Gatsby, leaning toward me, ‘I’m afraid I made you a little angry this morning in the car.’
There was the smile again, but this time I held out against it.
‘I don’t like mysteries,’ I answered. ‘And I don’t under- stand why you won’t come out frankly and tell me what you want. Why has it all got to come through Miss Baker?’
‘Oh, it’s nothing underhand,’ he assured me. ‘Miss Bak- er’s a great sportswoman, you know, and she’d never do anything that wasn’t all right.’
Suddenly he looked at his watch, jumped up and hurried from the room leaving me with Mr. Wolfshiem at the table. ‘He has to telephone,’ said Mr. Wolfshiem, following him with his eyes. ‘Fine fellow, isn’t he? Handsome to look at and
a perfect gentleman.’ ‘Yes.’
‘He’s an Oggsford man.’ ‘Oh!’
‘He went to Oggsford College in England. You know Oggsford College?’
‘I’ve heard of it.’
‘It’s one of the most famous colleges in the world.’
‘Have you known Gatsby for a long time?’ I inquired. ‘Several years,’ he answered in a gratified way. ‘I made
the pleasure of his acquaintance just after the war. But I knew I had discovered a man of fine breeding after I talked with him an hour. I said to myself: ‘There’s the kind of man you’d like to take home and introduce to your mother and sister.’ ‘ He paused. ‘I see you’re looking at my cuff buttons.’
I hadn’t been looking at them, but I did now. They were composed of oddly familiar pieces of ivory.
‘Finest specimens of human molars,’ he informed me. ‘Well!’ I inspected them. ‘That’s a very interesting idea.’ ‘Yeah.’ He flipped his sleeves up under his coat. ‘Yeah,
Gatsby’s very careful about women. He would never so much as look at a friend’s wife.’
When the subject of this instinctive trust returned to the table and sat down Mr. Wolfshiem drank his coffee with a jerk and got to his feet.
‘I have enjoyed my lunch,’ he said, ‘and I’m going to run off from you two young men before I outstay my welcome.’
‘Don’t hurry, Meyer,’ said Gatsby, without enthusiasm. Mr. Wolfshiem raised his hand in a sort of benediction.
As he shook hands and turned away his tragic nose was trembling. I wondered if I had said anything to offend him. ‘He becomes very sentimental sometimes,’ explained Gatsby. ‘This is one of his sentimental days. He’s quite a
character around New York—a denizen of Broadway.’ ‘Who is he anyhow—an actor?’
‘No.’
‘A dentist?’
‘Meyer Wolfshiem? No, he’s a gambler.’ Gatsby hesitated, then added coolly: ‘He’s the man who fixed the World’s Se- ries back in 1919.’
‘Fixed the World’s Series?’ I repeated.
The idea staggered me. I remembered of course that the World’s Series had been fixed in 1919 but if I had thought of it at all I would have thought of it as a thing that mere- ly HAPPENED, the end of some inevitable chain. It never occurred to me that one man could start to play with the faith of fifty million people—with the single-mindedness of a burglar blowing a safe.
‘How did he happen to do that?’ I asked after a minute. ‘He just saw the opportunity.’
‘Why isn’t he in jail?’
‘They can’t get him, old sport. He’s a smart man.’
I insisted on paying the check. As the waiter brought my change I caught sight of Tom Buchanan across the crowded room.
When he saw us Tom jumped up and took half a dozen
steps in our direction.
‘Where’ve you been?’ he demanded eagerly. ‘Daisy’s furi-
ous because you haven’t called up.’
‘This is Mr. Gatsby, Mr. Buchanan.’
They shook hands briefly and a strained, unfamiliar look
of embarrassment came over Gatsby’s face.
‘How’ve you been, anyhow?’ demanded Tom of me.
‘How’d you happen to come up this far to eat?’
‘I’ve been having lunch with Mr. Gatsby.’
I turned toward Mr. Gatsby, but he was no longer there. One October day in nineteen-seventeen—— (said Jordan
Baker that afternoon, sitting up very straight on a straight chair in the tea-garden at the Plaza Hotel) —I was walk- ing along from one place to another half on the sidewalks and half on the lawns. I was happier on the lawns because I had on shoes from England with rubber nobs on the soles that bit into the soft ground. I had on a new plaid skirt also that blew a little in the wind and whenever this happened the red, white and blue banners in front of all the houses stretched out stiff and said TUT-TUT-TUT-TUT in a disap- proving way.
When I came opposite her house that morning her white roadster was beside the curb, and she was sitting in it with a lieutenant I had never seen before. They were so engrossed in each other that she didn’t see me until I was five feet away.
‘Hello