"But I wouldn't eat none, George. I'd leave it all for you. You
could cover your beans with it and I wouldn't touch none of it." George still stared morosely at the fire. "When I think of the swell
time I could have without you, I go nuts. I never get no peace." Lennie still knelt. He looked off into the darkness across the
river. "George, you want I should go away and leave you alone?" "Where the hell could you go?"
"Well, I could. I could go off in the hills there. Some place I'd
find a cave."
"Yeah? How'd you eat? You ain't got sense enough to find nothing
to eat."
"I'd find things, George. I don't need no nice food with ketchup.
I'd lay out in the sun and nobody'd hurt me. An' if I foun' a mouse, I could keep it. Nobody'd take it away from me."
George looked quickly and searchingly at him. "I been mean, ain't I?"
"If you don' want me I can go off in the hills an' find a cave. I can go away any time."
Lennie avoided the bait. He had sensed his advantage. "If you don't want me, you only jus' got to say so, and I'll go off in those hills right there- right up in those hills and live by myself. An' I won't get no mice stole from me."
George said, "I want you to stay with me, Lennie. Jesus somebody'd shoot you for a coyote if you was by yourself. with me. Your Aunt Clara wouldn't like you running off by even if she is dead."
Christ,
No, you stay yourself,
Lennie spoke craftily, "Tell me- like you done before."
"Tell you what?"
"About the rabbits."
George snapped, "You ain't gonna put nothing over on me." Lennie pleaded, "Come on, George. Tell me. Please, George. Like
you done before."
"You get a kick outa that, don't you? Awright, I'll tell you, and
then we'll eat our supper...."
George's voice became deeper. He repeated his words rhythmically
as though he had said them many times before. "Guys like us, that work on ranches, are the loneliest guys in the world. They got no fambly. They don't belong no place. They come to a ranch an' work up a stake and then they go into town and blow their stake, and the first thing you know they're poundin' their tail on some other ranch. They ain't got nothing to look ahead to."
Lennie was delighted. "That's it- that's it. Now tell how it is with us."
George went on. "With us it ain't like that. We got a future. We got somebody to talk to that gives a damn about us. We don't have to sit in no bar room blowin' in our jack jus' because we got no place else to go. If them other guys gets in jail they can rot for all anybody gives a damn. But not us."
Lennie broke in. "But not us! An' why? Because... because I got you to look after me, and you got me to look after you, and that's
why." He laughed delightedly. "Go on now, George!"
"You got it by heart. You can do it yourself."
"No, you. I forget some a' the things. Tell about how it's gonna be."
"O.K. Someday- we're gonna get the jack together and we're gonna have a little house and a couple of acres an' a cow and some pigs and-"
"An' live off the fatta the lan'," Lennie shouted. "An' have rabbits. Go on, George! Tell about what we're gonna have in the
garden and about the rabbits in the cages and about the rain in the winter and the stove, and how thick the cream is on the milk like you can hardly cut it. Tell about that, George."
"Why'n't you do it yourself? You know all of it."
"No... you tell it. It ain't the same if I tell it. Go on... George. How I get to tend the rabbits."
"Well," said George, "we'll have a big vegetable patch and a
rabbit hutch and chickens. And when it rains in the winter, we'll just say the hell with goin' to work, and we'll build up a fire in the stove and set around it an' listen to the rain comin' down on the roof- Nuts!" He took out his pocket knife. "I ain't got time for no more." He drove his knife through the top of one of the bean cans,
sawed out the top and passed the can to Lennie. Then he opened a second can. From his side pocket he brought out two spoons and passed one of them to Lennie.
They sat by the fire and filled their mouths with beans and chewed mightily. A few beans slipped out of the side of Lennie's mouth. George gestured with his spoon. "What you gonna say tomorrow when the boss asks you questions?"
Lennie stopped chewing and swallowed. His face was concentrated. "I... I ain't gonna... say a word."
"Good boy! That's fine, Lennie! Maybe you're gettin' better. When we get the coupla acres I can let you tend the rabbits all right. 'Specially if you remember as good as that."
Lennie choked with pride. "I can remember," he said.
George motioned with his spoon again. "Look, Lennie. I want you to look around here. You can remember this place, can't you? The ranch is about a quarter mile up that way. Just follow the river?"
"Sure," said Lennie. "I can remember this. Di'n't I remember about not gonna say a word?"
"'Course you did. Well, look. Lennie- if you jus' happen to get in trouble like you always done before, I want you to come right here an' hide in the brush."
"Hide in the brush