Continuing thus, I came at length opposite to the inn at 
which the various diligences and carriages usually stopped. 
Here I paused, I knew not why; but I remained some minutes 
with my eyes fixed on a coach that was coming towards me 
from the other end of the street. As it drew nearer, I observed 
that it was the Swiss diligence: it stopped just where I was 
standing; and, on the door being opened, I perceived Henry 
Clerval, who, on seeing me, instantly sprung out. "My dear 
Frankenstein," exclaimed he, "how glad I am to see you! how 
fortunate that you should be here at the very moment of my 
alighting!" 

"It gives me the greatest delight to see you; but tell me 
how you left my father, brothers, and Elizabeth." 

"Very well, and very happy, only a little uneasy that they 
hear from you so seldom. By the bye, I mean to lecture you 
a little upon their account myself. — But, my dear Franken- 
stein," continued he, stopping short, and gazing full in my 
face, "I did not before remark how very ill you appear; so thin 
and pale; you look as if you had been watching for several 
nights." 

"You have guessed right; I have lately been so deeply 
engaged in one occupation, that I have not allowed myself 
sufficient rest, as you see: but I hope, I sincerely hope, that 
all these employments are now at an end, and that I am at 
length free." 

We ascended into my room, and the servant presently 
brought breakfast; but I was unable to contain myself. It 
was not joy only that possessed me; I felt my flesh tingle 
with excess of sensitiveness, and my pulse beat rapidly. I 
was unable to remain for a single instant in the same place; 
I jumped over the chairs, clapped my hands, and laughed 
aloud. Clerval at first attributed my unusual spirits to joy on 
his arrival; but when he observed me more attentively, he 
saw a wildness in my eyes for which he could not account; 
and my loud, unrestrained, heartless laughter, frightened 
and astonished him. 

"My dear Victor," cried he, "what, for God's sake, is the 
matter? Do not laugh in that manner. How ill you are! What 
is the cause of all this?" 

"Do not ask me," cried I, putting my hands before my 
eyes, for I thought I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the 
room; "he can tell. — Oh, save me! save me!" I imagined 
that the monster seized me; I struggled furiously, and fell 
down in a fit. 

Poor Clerval! what must have been his feelings? A 
meeting, which he anticipated with such joy, so strangely 
turned to bitterness. But I was not the witness of his grief; 
for I was lifeless, and did not recover my senses for a long, 
long time.

But I was in reality very ill; and surely nothing but the 
unbounded and unremitting attentions of my friend could 
have restored me to life. The form of the monster on whom I 
had bestowed existence was for ever before my eyes, and I 
raved incessantly concerning him. Doubtless my words sur- 
prised Henry: he at first believed them to be the wanderings 
of my disturbed imagination; but the pertinacity with which I 
continually recurred to the same subject persuaded him that 
my disorder indeed owed its origin to some uncommon and 
terrible event. 

By very slow degrees, and with frequent relapses, that 
alarmed and grieved my friend, I recovered. I remember the 
first time I became capable of observing outward objects with 
any kind of pleasure, I perceived that the fallen leaves had 
disappeared, and that the young buds were shooting forth 
from the trees that shaded my window. It was a divine spring; 
and the season contributed greatly to my convalescence. I 
felt also sentiments of joy and affection revive in my bosom; 
my gloom disappeared, and in a short time I became as 
cheerful as before I was attacked by the fatal passion. 

"Dearest Clerval," exclaimed I, "how kind, how very good 
you are to me. This whole winter, instead of being spent in 
study, as you promised yourself, has been consumed in my 
sick room. How shall I ever repay you? I feel the greatest 
remorse for the disappointment of which I have been the 
occasion; but you will forgive me." 

"My uncle and I conversed a long time last night about 
what profession Ernest should follow. His constant illness 
when young has deprived him of the habits of application; 
and now that he enjoys good health, he is continually in 
the open air, climbing the hills, or rowing on the lake. I 
therefore proposed that he should be a farmer; which you 
know, Cousin, is a favourite scheme of mine. A farmer's is 
a very healthy happy life; and the least hurtful, or rather the 
most beneficial profession of any. My uncle had an idea of 
his being educated as an advocate, that through his interest 
he might become a judge. But, besides that he is not at all 
fitted for such an occupation, it is certainly more creditable to 
cultivate the earth for the sustenance of man, than to be the 
confidant, and sometimes the accomplice, of his vices; which 
is the profession of a lawyer. I said, that